---
layout: post
title: "Day 1 - Introduction and Github ReadMe"
date: 2022-02-19
categories: github
tags: [GitHub]
---

## Introduction

Hi, I'm Julius Walton and I'm a software engineer that graduated from the College of Charleston in May of 2021. I've decided to make this blog in part to help me document my commitment to take on the 100 days of coding challenge. My goal for this is to improve my knowledge of data structures and algorithms. Specifically, technical questions that someone might find on leetcode or hackerrank.



I plan on updating this blog daily so that my progress can be tracked and documented. Without further delay, time to skip this boring introduction and move on to the fun software development. Cheers!🎉🎉





## GitHub ReadMe

After being out of practice when it comes to GitHub, I decided to take a look at my old GitHub account. And well - it was a mess. There were old repositories from school that didn't amount to anything meaningful as they were only created for minor homework assignments. It was time for a major clean-up. After keeping the repositories that are meaningful to me in terms of my software development journey, I thought it was time to spruce up my profile with the GitHub ReadMe feature.



To be completely honest, I used a generator to create my ReadMe, although I did run through the code and edit a few things to make it more personal. For example, the cat typing gif. I think this was a good way to jolt my memory on HTML and just the general layout of GitHub.



[Anyways, here's the link to the ReadMe code if you want to check it out](https://github.com/Julius-Walton/Julius-Walton/edit/main/README.md)



[As well as the link to my personal GitHub account where you can see me fill out that nice green bar every day for the next 99 days](https://github.com/Julius-Walton)



## A little extra - Linked List

Although I won't discuss it here, I did a few coding problems on linked list. I'm excited to share what I've learned. Especially creating an LRU Cache (Least Recently Used) using a combination of a hashtable and a doubly linked list. But that will come at a later date.