---
layout: post
title: "Day 22 - Task Assignment"
date: 2022-03-12
tags: [Greedy Algorithms, JavaScript]
---

Analyzing the Task Assignment question using greedy algorithms

## Understanding the Problem

* Inputs
  * `k` - an integer representing the number of workers
  * `tasks` - an array of positive integers representing task durations

Sample Input
```
k=3
[1, 3, 5, 3, 1, 4]
```
  
* Output
  * An array of arrays containing integers representing the indices of the tasks


Sample Output
```
[
    [4, 2],
    [0, 5],
    [3, 1],
]
```

## Approach
When looking at greedy algorithms, often the first thing to do here is to sort the list to find our solution. Next, we need to consider what pairs will help us find the smallest sum. Therefore, we want to reduce pairing large numbers with large numbers. The way to do this would be to work from the outside of the array. In other words, we want to grab the smallest number and then the largest number and work both ends towards the center of the array. This will make sure that smaller numbers are paired with larger numbers. One thing we need to consider as we are adding these pairs to our result is that we want to return the indices. Therefore, we need to map the indices to the task values.

### Algorithm
* Declare `results` array and set it to `[]` - this array will be a double array of integers
* Declare `taskIndicies` hashmap of integer, integer type and set it to the value of the function `mapTaskIndicies(tasks)`
* `mapTaskIndicies(tasks)` takes the integer list of tasks and does the following
  * Declare `map` hashmap of integer, integer type and set it to `{}`
  * Loop through the `tasks` and for each entry
    * Declare `duration` and set it to `tasks[i]` where `i` is the current index in `tasks`
    * If `duration in map` then push `i` to `map[duration]` 
    * Else set `map[duration]` to an array with index `i` -> `[i]`
    * Return `map`
* Sort `tasks`
* Loop while `i < k` 
  * Declare `task1` and set to `tasks[i]`
  * Declare `tasks2` and set to `tasks[tasks.length - 1 - i]`
  * Declare `res1` and set to `tasksIndicies[task1].pop`
  * Declare `res2` and set to `tasksIndicies[task2].pop`
  * Push `[res1, res2]` to `results`
* Return `results`

### Implementation
```js
function taskAssignment(k, tasks) {
  const results = [];
  const taskIndicies = mapTaskIndicies(tasks);
  tasks.sort((a, b) => a - b);
  
  for(let i = 0; i < k; i++){
    const task1 = tasks[i];
    const task2 = tasks[tasks.length - 1 - i];
    
    const res1 = taskIndicies[task1].pop();
    const res2 = taskIndicies[task2].pop();
    
    results.push([res1, res2]);
  }
  
  return results;
}

function mapTaskIndicies(tasks){
  const map = {};
  
  for(let i = 0; i < tasks.length; i++){
    let duration = tasks[i];
    if(duration in map){
      map[duration].push(i);
    } else {
      map[duration] = [i];
    }
  }
  
  return map;
}
```  