---
layout: post
title: "Day 21 - Tandem Bicycle Speed"
date: 2022-03-11
tags: [Greedy Algorithms, JavaScript]
---

Today we look at the Tandem Bicycle Speed Problem. Another problem in the greedy algorithms series.

## Understanding the Problem

Inputs: `redShirts`, `blueShirts` - array of positive integers, `fastest` - boolean
Output: Single integer

Problem Statement: Create a function that returns the maximum or minimum total speed f all the tandem bicycles. A redShirt rider must be paired with a blueShirt rider. If `fastest = true` return the maximum speed, else return the minimum. The speed of the bike is always determined by the fastest speed.

Sample Input
```
redShirts = [5, 5, 3, 9, 2]
blueShirts = [3, 6, 7, 2, 1]
fastest = true
```

Sample Output
```
32
```

## Approach

Again with greedy algorithms, a common technique in these pairing problems is to sort the arrays. Therefore, the first thing that we are going to do is sort both the redShirt and blueShirt arrays. From here the algorithm becomes fairly easy if we are focusing only on finding the maximum speed - i.e `fastest = true`
Then we take can iterate through the arrays and take `i` from one and `array. length - 1- i` from the other. By doing that we grab the smallest element from one array and the largest from the other. Since speed is determined by the fastest rider we are making sure the fastest riders are determining the speed of the pair. However, if we want the minimum speed we need to reverse one of the arrays. By doing so we are making sure to grab values that have the smallest difference between them. 

### Algorithm
* Sort both input arrays in ascending order
* if `fastest === false` reverse the order of `redShirtSpeeds`
* Declare `sum` variable and set to `0`
* Loop through the length of one of the arrays and for each index
  * Declare variable `red` and set to `redShirtSpeeds[i]`
  * Declare variable `blue` and set to `blueShirtSpeeds[i]`
  * Set `sum` to `sum + Math.max(red, blue)`
* Return `sum`

### Implementation

``` js
function tandemBicycle(redShirtSpeeds, blueShirtSpeeds, fastest) {
  redShirtSpeeds.sort((a, b) => a - b);
    blueShirtSpeeds.sort((a, b) => a - b);

    if(!fastest) reverse(redShirtSpeeds);
    
    let sum = 0;
    for(let i = 0; i < redShirtSpeeds.length; i++){
        const red = redShirtSpeeds[i];
        const blue = blueShirtSpeeds[blueShirtSpeeds.length - 1 - i];
        sum += Math.max(red, blue);
    }
  return sum;
}

function reverse(array){
    let start = 0;
    let end = array.length - 1;
    while(start < end){
        const temp = array[start];
        array[start] = array[end];
        array[end] = temp;
        start++;
        end--;
    }
```