---
layout: post
title: "Day 6 - Stacks Part 2"
date: 2022-02-24
tags: [Stacks, JavaScript]
---

## Introduction
Today I want to conclude my learning on stacks with two questions. I think I will revisit stacks later on in the challenge. However, I feel like I need to shift my focus to other topics.

## Next Greater Element
For this problem, we are given an array of integers and we want to return a new array containing the next element in the input array that's greater than the element at that index in the input array. If there is no greater element, we return -1. Treat the array as a circular array.

Sample Input
```
array = [2, 4, 6, 7, -1]
```

Sample Output
```
[4, 6, 7, -1, 2]
```

To solve this problem with a stack, we want to go through the input array twice. We loop through it twice because the array is circular. The stack will be keeping track of the indices of the input array.Then for every entry in our input array we compare the value that the stack index is pointing to and if that number is lower than we know it is the next greatest number for that index. 


```js
function nextGreaterElement(array){
    const result = new Array(array.length).fill(-1);
    const stack = [];

    for (let i = 0; i < 2 * array.length; i++){
        const circularIndex =  i % array.length;

        while (stack.length > 0 && array[stack[stack.length - 1]] < array[circularIndex]){
            const top = stack.pop();
            result[top] = array[circularIndex];
        }

        stack.push(circularIndex);
    }

    return result;
}

```

This problem really helped me understand how stacks can be used to reference other data structures. This problem relies on the stack to get the appropriate index from the input array to find the right answer.

## Shorten Path
In this problem, we need to take a Unix path and shorten it as much as possible. 


Sample Input
```
 path = "/foo/../test/../test/../foo//bar/./baz"

```

Sample Output
```
"/foo/bar/baz"
```

This problem does require prior knowledge of how Unix paths work. To get the solution to this problem, we use a stack to push individual tokens in the string. If the token is '..' we push the token on the stack. However, if the top of the stack does not equal '' and the token is '..' we pop the element from the stack. We want to do this because the '..' token in Unix means to go up one directory. If the token is anything else, then we just add it to the stack. Another key thing to note in this problem is that we have to notice if the path starts with '/'. We also want to split the string on that character.

```js
function shortenPath(path){
    const isAbsolutePath = path[0] === '/';
    const tokens = path.split('/').filter(isImportant);
    const stack = [];
    if (isAbsolutePath) stack.push('');
    for (const token of tokens){
        if (token === '..'){
            if (stack.length === 0 || stack[stack.length - 1] === '..'){
                stack.push(token);
            } else if (stack[stack.length - 1] !== ''){
                stack.pop(); //stating to go back up one directory
            }
        } else {
            stack.push(token);
        }
    }

    if(stack.length === 1 && stack[0] === '') return '/'; //empty stack case
    return stack.join('/');
}

function isImportant(token){
    return token.length > 0 && token !== '.';
     // the single dot is useless as it just means to stay in the same directory
}

```

## Conclusion

I think my understanding of the use cases for stacks has increased. They are not as difficult as I originally thought. I do believe that through my findings in the past two days that I should focus on a different topic. I think recursion may be the next topic as I'm finding it to be difficult in problems that include recursive answers.

