---
layout: post
title: "Day 32 - Validate BST"
date: 2022-03-21
tags: [Binary Search Trees, Binary Trees, JavaScript]
---

Problem Statement: Write a function that determines if the input is a valid BST

## Understanding the Problem

Input

* `tree` - a potentially invalid BST

Sample Input

```js
tree =     10
         /    \
       5       15
     /   \    /  \
    2     5  13  22
   /          \
  1            14
```

Output

* A boolean value representing if the tree is a valid BST

Sample Output

```js
true
```

## Approach

To solve this problem, we will use recursion techniques. Our recursive method will check if the current value of the node we are at in the tree is within some local maximum and minimum. We know that the tree was not appropriately constructed if it is outside those bounds. Otherwise, we continue. When we continue, we call the left subtree replacing the new maximum with the node's value. This is because everything to the left has to be smaller than the current node's value. We do something similar to the right. However, we replace the local minimum with the node's current value.

### Algorithm

* Call `helper(tree, -Infinity, Infinity)` from the main method.
  * If `tree` is `null` return `true`
  * If `tree.value < minValue` or `tree.value >= maxValue` return `false`
  * Declare `isLeftValid` and set to `helper(tree.left, minValue, tree.value)`
  * Declare `isRightValid` and set to `helper(tree.right, tree.value, maxValue)`
  * Return `isLeftValid && isRightValid`
* Return

### Implementation

```js
class BST {
  constructor(value) {
    this.value = value;
    this.left = null;
    this.right = null;
  }
}

function validateBst(tree) {
  return helper(tree, -Infinity, Infinity);
}

function helper(tree, minValue, maxValue){
 if(tree === null) return true;
 if(tree.value < minValue || tree.value  >= maxValue) return false;
 const isLeftValid = helper(tree.left, minValue, tree.value);
 const isRightValid = helper(tree.right, tree.value, maxValue);
 return isLeftValid && isRightValid
}
```

## Time & Space Complexity

O(n) time | O(d) space - where n is the number of nodes and d is the depth of the BST
