---
layout: post
title: "Day 20 - Minimum Waiting Time"
date: 2022-03-10
tags: [Greedy Algorithms, Javascript]
---

I'm taking a break from dynamic programming and looking at some greedy algorithms. For the first problem I'm tackling the basic minimum waiting time.


## Understanding the Problem

Input: An array of positive numbers representing tasks lengths
Output: An integer representing time 

Problem Statement: Create a function that takes an array of integers representing task lengths and return the minimum waiting time it takes for all taks to complete.

Sample Input
```
[1, 2, 3]
```

Sample Output
```
4
```

The total of the queue was calculated as such. The task of value 1 does not have to wait to be executed. Therefore, the waiting time for it is 0. The task of value 2 has to wait for the task of value 1 to finish, so it's waiting time is 1. The final task has to wait 2 + 1 = 3 seconds before execution. Summing all of that we get 4.

## Approach

Looking at this problem we need to find the optimal order of which to execute the tasks. Looking at our example we can notice that by executing the tasks in ascending order we can reduce the waiting time to the minimum amount. Also to be noted, tasks at the begining are added to the waiting time for tasks behind them in the queue. For example, the value 1 was both considered in the waiting time for 2 and 3. Therefore, when doing this calculation we need to make sure that we carry the appropriate task times down the list. 

### Algorithm

* Sort the array
* Define `res` variable and set to `0` - this variable will be used to accumulate the total time for our answer
* Loop through the sorted input array and for each entry
  * Define variable `time` that equals `queries[i]` where `i` is the position in the array
  * Define variable `queriesLeft` that equals `queries.length - (i + 1)`
  * Set `res` to `res + (time * queriesLeft)`
* Return `res`

### Implementation

```
function minimumWaitingTime(queries) {
  queries.sort((a, b) => a - b);
	
	let res = 0;
	for(let i = 0; i < queries.length; i++){
		const time = queries[i];
		const queiresLeft = queries.length - (i + 1);
		res += time * queiresLeft;
	}
  return res;
}

```

## Time & Space Complexity
O(nlog(n))time | O(1) space : where n is the number of queries