---
layout: post
title: "Day 40 - Binary Tree Diameter"
date: 2022-03-30
tags: [Binary Trees, JavaScript]
---

Problem Statement: Create a function that takes in a binary tree and returns the tree's diameter.

## Understanding the Problem

Input

* `tree` - the root of a binary tree

Sample Input

```js
tree =     1
         /   \
       3      2
     /   \   
    7     4 
   /       \   
  8         5
  |         |
  9         6
```

Output

* An integer representing the diameter of the binary tree

Sample Output

```js
6
```

## Approach

First, we need to understand what the diameter of a tree is. The tree's diameter is defined as the longest path through a tree. Then from there, what we can do is the following. We can expand out left and right at each node until we hit null values. While doing this, we also keep track of the height and diameter at each point. By doing so, we can determine the length of the path through that specific node. While we do this, we want to keep track of which node had the longest path extending left and right. That node will determine the length of the diameter.

### Algorithm

TreeInfo Class

* Set `diameter` and `height` properties
  
Main Function

* Call `helper` function from main
* Return `diameter` from `helper` function return

Helper Function

* Return `TreeInfo(0, 0)` if `tree === null`
* Declare and Set `left` to `helper(tree.left)`
* Declare and Set `right` to `helper(tree.right)`
* Declare and Set `pathThroughRoot` to `left.height + right.height`
* Declare and Set `max` to `MAX(left.dimater, right.diamter)`
* Declare and Set `currentDiamter` to `MAX(pathThroughRoot, max)`
* Declare and Set `currentHeight` to `1 + MAX(left.height, right.height)`
* Return `TreeInfo(currentDiamter, currentHeight)`

### Implementation

```js
class TreeInfo {
 constructor(diameter, height){
  this.diameter = diameter;
  this.height = height;
 }
}

//Main function
function binaryTreeDiameter(tree) {
  return helper(tree).diameter;
}

function helper(tree){
 if(tree == null){
  return new TreeInfo(0, 0);
 }
 
 const left = helper(tree.left);
 const right = helper(tree.right);
 
 const pathThroughRoot = left.height + right.height;
 const max = Math.max(left.diameter, right.diameter);
 const currentDiameter = Math.max(pathThroughRoot, max);
 const currentHeight = 1 + Math.max(left.height, right.height);
 
 return new TreeInfo(currentDiameter, currentHeight);
}
```

## Time & Space Complexity

O(n) time | O(h) space - where n is the number of nodes in the tree and h is the height of the tree
