---
layout: post
title: "Day 41 - Successor"
date: 2022-03-31
tags: [Binary Trees, JavaScript]
---

Problem Statement: Create a function that takes a Binary tree and a node within the tree and returns the given node's successor. Each node has an additional pointer that points to its parent.

## Understanding the Problem

Input

* `tree` - the root of a binary tree
* `node` - a node contained in the input binary tree

Sample Input

```js
tree =     1
         /   \
       2      3
     /   \   
    4     5 
   /       \   
  6         5

node = 5

```

Output

* An integer representing the successor of the given node in the given tree

Sample Output

```js
1
```

## Approach

For this problem, we need to understand the definition of a successor. A successor of a node is the node that comes immediately after the node given if the tree is traversed using in-order traversal. Now there are a few things to note. First, if a given node has a right subtree, then the next node that will follow using in-order traversal is the leftmost node of the right subtree. Second, if a given node doesn't have a right subtree, then the next node that will follow using in-order traversal is the rightmost parent of that node. Using these two statements, we can create separate functions based on if the input node has a right subtree or not.

### Algorithm
  
Main Function

* Return `leftMostChild(node.right)` if `node` has a right subtree
* Return `rightMostParent(node)` if `node` does not have a right subtree

Left Most Child

* While `current.left !== null`
  * `current = current.left`
* Return `current`

Right Most Parent

* While `current.parent !== null` and `current.parent.right === current`
  * `current = current.parent`
* Return `current.parent`

### Implementation

```js
function findSuccessor(tree, node) {
  if (node.right != null) return leftMostChild(node.right);
 
  return rightMostParent(node);
}

function leftMostChild(node) {
 let current = node;
 while(current.left !== null){
  current = current.left;
 }
 
 return current;
}

function rightMostParent(node){
 let current = node;
 while(current.parent !== null && current.parent.right === current){
  current = current.parent;
 }
 
 return current.parent;
}

```

## Time & Space Complexity

O(h) time | O(1) space - where h is the height of the tree
