---
layout: post
title: "Day 7 - Recursion Part 1"
date: 2022-02-25
tags: [Recursion, JavaScript]
---

## Introduction

It has been a whole week since I've started this challenge!! 🎉 🎉  I know I still have 93 days to go, but a whole week feels like a big accomplishment to me. I'm really enjoying sitting down and coding every day.

Anyways, for today's post I will be starting on recursion. One of the elements of recursion that is difficult for me is creating the base case. Once I can figure out how everything breaks down to the base case, I can solve the problem. Let's go over two basic questions on recursion today.

## Permutations

Creating permutations of an array is a very basic recursion question. In this solution we are going to use a swap to create the permutations of the array. The base case will be if the index we are using for swapping is equal to the last index. In that case we return.

```js
function getPermutations(array) {
  const permutations = [];
 helper(0, array, permutations);
 return permutations;
}

function helper(i, array, permutations){
 if (i === array.length - 1){
  permutations.push(array.slice());
 } else {
  for (let j = i; j < array.length; j++){
   swap(i , j, array);
   helper(i + 1, array, permutations);
   swap(i, j, array);
  }
 }
}

function swap(i, j, array){
 const temp = array[i];
 array[i] = array[j];
 array[j] = temp;
}

```

## Powerset

A powerset is defined as the set of all subsets. So for the set [1, 2] the powerset is

```js
[[], [1], [2], [1,2]]
```

To break this problem down its easy to think of creating all the sets of length i to length n . i starting at 0 and n being the length of the original set. Our base case will just be a variable of an empty set [[]]

```js
function powerset(array){
    const subsets = [[]] //base case of set with no elements - the empty set
    for (const e of array){
        const length = subsets.length;
        for (let i = 0; i < length; i++){
            const subset = subsets[i] // make a copy of element at index i
            subsets.push(subset.concat(e)) // add our new element to it
        }
    }
    return subsets;
}

```

## Conclusion

Today's post was yet another short one. It has taken me a long time to really understand how these solutions work, and I feel like I still don't understand them that well. It will take more review and more recursion problems for me to feel comfortable with the techniques I need to solve them. Until next time, cheers!
