---
layout: post
title: "Day 23 - Valid Starting City"
date: 2022-03-13
tags: [Greedy Algorithms, JavaScript]
---

An analysis of the Valid Starting City problem. The last question in the greedy algorithm series.

## Understanding the Problem

**Problem Statement:** The cities in this problem are in a circular path - i.e the array is circular. Each city also has a gas station that has fule to provide, and each city is a distance away from the next. Write a function that returns the index of the city in which we can start, travel through all the cities, and return with 0 or more miles left. There will always be exactly one valid city. There is always exactly enough fuel to travel through all the cities once.

* Inputs
  * `distances` - an array of integers representing how far away from city `i` is from the city `i + 1` in the array
  * `fuel` - an array of integers representing how much fuel is available at city `i`
  * `mpg` - an integer representing the miles per gallon that the car has

Sample Input

```js
  "distances": [5, 25, 15, 10, 15],
  "fuel": [1, 2, 1, 0, 3],
  "mpg": 10
```

* Outputs
  * An integer representing the index of the valid starting city

Sample Output

```js
4
```

## Approach

The approach to this problem is a bit tricky. What we need to do to find the solution is to look at how many miles we can travel after we have reached a certain city. For example, let's look at the sample inputs and start at city `i = 1`. If we look at the previous city at `i = 0` we can notice that the distance it will take to get to our current city is `5` and the fuel we get at city `i = 0` is `1`. Therefore, our total miles we have left when we reach `i = 1` is `5` because the miles we have left is equal to `miles left + (fuel from previous city * mpg - distance from previous city)` -> `0 + 1 * 10 - 5`. Now we want to go around the entire array and do this until we reach the end of the array. The results we have will be `0, 5, 0, -5, -15`. What we can notice from this is at some point the miles left will become negative. This means that we need to start from the city with the smallest number. If we do not start from that city then we will always arrive back to it with negative gas.

### Algorithm

* Declare `milesRemaining` as integer - set to 0
* Declare `validCity` as integer - set to 0 - this will be used to return the valid city
* Declare `milesAtValidCity` as integer - set to 0 - this will be used to keep track of the city with the minimum miles left
* Loop through `distances` array and at each index
  * Declare `distanceFromPrevious = distances[i - 1]`
  * Declare `fuelFromPrevious = fuel[i - 1]`
  * Set `milesRemaining += fuelFromPrevious * mpg - distanceFromPrevious`
  * If `milesRemaining < milesAtValidCity`
    * `milesAtValidCity = milesRemaining`
    * `validCity = i`
* Return `validCity`

### Implementation

```js
function validStartingCity(distances, fuel, mpg) {
    let milesRemaining = 0;
    
    let validCity = 0;
    let milesAtValidCity = 0;
    
    for(let i = 1; i < distances.length; i++){
        const distanceFromPrevious = distances[i - 1];
        const fuelFromPrevious = fuel[i - 1];
        milesRemaining += fuelFromPrevious * mpg - distanceFromPrevious;
        
        if(milesRemaining < milesAtValidCity){
            milesAtValidCity = milesRemaining;
            validCity = i;
        }
    }
  return validCity;
}
```

### Time & Space Complexity

O(n) time | O(1) space - where n is the number of cities
