---
layout: post
title: "Day 26 - River Sizes"
date: 2022-03-16
tags: [Graphs, JavaScript]
---

Taking a look at calculating river sizes in a graph

## Understanding the Problem

Problem Statement: Given a two-dimensional array of `1`s and `0`s, create a function that returns the sizes of all rivers in the array. A river is a connection of `1`s that are connected vertically or horizontally. However, rivers may not connect adjacently.

Inputs

* `matrix` - a 2D array of integers containing `1`s and `0`s

Sample Input

```js
  "matrix": [
    [1, 0, 0, 1, 0],
    [1, 0, 1, 0, 0],
    [0, 0, 1, 0, 1],
    [1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
    [1, 0, 1, 1, 0]
  ]
```

Output

* An array of integers denoting the river sizes in no particular order

Sample Output

```js
[1, 2, 2, 2, 5]
```

## Approach

The first thing we want to do with this problem is treat the array as a graph. Now instead of traversing the array like a normal array, we traverse it like a graph. Therefore, using a method like DFS or BFS is going to help us accomplish this. For our solution, we are going to use DFS. Now since we don't want to overlap the nodes that we have already searched, we want to keep track of all the nodes we have visited in another data structure. By doing so we also avoid counting the river multiple times. Finally, when we are performing our DFS we only want to extend it to nodes that haven't been visited that are either in the same row or column since rivers can't flow adjacently in this problem.

### Algorithm

* Function `riverSizes(matrix)`
  * Declare `sizes = []`
  * Declare `visited` as a 2D array with the same dimensions as `matrix` set all values to `false`
  * For `i = 0; i < matrix.length; i++`
    * For `j = 0; j < matrix[i].length; j++`
      * If `visited[i][j]` continue
      * Else call function `traverse(i, j, matrix, visited, sizes)`
* Return `sizes`

* Function `traverse(i, j, matrix, visited, sizes)`
  * Declare `currentSize = 0`
  * Declare `nodesToExplore = [[i, j]]` - this is a stack
  * While `nodesToExplore` is not empty
    * Declare `current = nodesToExplore.pop()`
    * Set `i = current[0]`
    * Set `j = current[1]`
    * If `visited[i][j]` continue
      * Else `visited[i][j] = true`
    * If `matrix[i][j] === 0` continue
      * Else `currentSize += 1`
    * Declare `unvisitedNeighbors =  function getUnvisited(i, j, matrix, visited)`
    * For each entry `neighbor` of `unvisitedNeighhors`
      * Push `neighbor` to stack `nodesToExplore`
  * If `currentSize > 0` push `currentSize` to `sizes`

* Function `getUnvisited(i, j, matrix, visited)`
  * Declare `unvisited = []`
  * If `i > 0 && !visited[i - 1][j]`
    * `unvisited.push([i - 1, j])`
  * If `i < matrix.length - 1 && !visited[i + 1][j]`
    * `unvisited.push([i + 1, j])`
  * If `j > 0 && !visited[i][j - 1]`
    * `unvisited.push([i, j - 1]`
  * If `j < matrix[0].length - 1 && !visited[i][j + 1]`
    * `unvisited.push([i, j + 1])`
  * Return `unvisited`

### Implementation

```js
function riverSizes(matrix) {
  const sizes = [];
 const visited = matrix.map(row => row.map(value => false));
 for(let i = 0; i < matrix.length; i++){
  for(let j = 0; j < matrix[i].length; j++){
   if(visited[i][j]) continue;  
   traverse(i, j, matrix, visited, sizes);
  }
 }
 return sizes;
}

function traverse(i, j, matrix, visited, sizes){
 let currentSize = 0;
 const nodesToExplore = [[i, j]];
 while(nodesToExplore.length){
  const current = nodesToExplore.pop();
  i = current[0];
  j = current[1];
  if(visited[i][j]) continue;
  visited[i][j] = true;
  if (matrix[i][j] === 0) continue;
  currentSize++;
  const unvisitedNeighbors = getUnvisited(i, j, matrix, visited);
  for(const neighbor of unvisitedNeighbors){
   nodesToExplore.push(neighbor);
  }
 }
 if(currentSize > 0) sizes.push(currentSize);
}

function getUnvisited(i, j, matrix, visited){
 const unvisited = [];
 if(i > 0 && !visited[i - 1][j]) unvisited.push([i - 1, j]);
 if(i < matrix.length - 1 && !visited[i + 1][j]) unvisited.push([i + 1, j]);
 if(j > 0 && !visited[i][j - 1]) unvisited.push([i, j - 1]);
 if(j < matrix[0].length - 1 && !visited[i][j + 1]) unvisited.push([i, j + 1]);
 return unvisited;
}
```

## Time & Space Complexity

O(wh) time | O(wh) space - where w and h are the width and height of the input matrix
